Can you imagine 24-hours without heartburn?
>>> THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT HAS A without heartburn?
>>> THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT HAS A CONSUMER FINANCIAL PROTECTION
CONSUMER FINANCIAL PROTECTION BUREAU THANKS TO SENATOR
BUREAU THANKS TO SENATOR ELIZABETH WARREN WHO IS NOW A
ELIZABETH WARREN WHO IS NOW A PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE BACK WHEN
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE BACK WHEN ELIZABETH WARREN WAS A HARVARD
ELIZABETH WARREN WAS A HARVARD LAW SCHOOL PROFESSOR SHE DECIDED
LAW SCHOOL PROFESSOR SHE DECIDED CONSUMERS NEEDED FEDERAL
CONSUMERS NEEDED FEDERAL PROTECTION FROM PREDATORY
PROTECTION FROM PREDATORY PRACTICES FROM BANKS AND LENDING
PRACTICES FROM BANKS AND LENDING COMPANIES WHO TARGET THE MOST
COMPANIES WHO TARGET THE MOST FINANCIALLY VULNERABLE AMONG US,
FINANCIALLY VULNERABLE AMONG US, THE COMPANIES THAT TRY TO TAKE
THE COMPANIES THAT TRY TO TAKE ADVANTAGE OF NEWLY ENLISTED
ADVANTAGE OF NEWLY ENLISTED MEMBERS OF THE MILITARY OR
MEMBERS OF THE MILITARY OR COMPANIES THAT SPECIALIZE IN SO
COMPANIES THAT SPECIALIZE IN SO CALLED PAY DAY LOANS, THAT
CALLED PAY DAY LOANS, THAT CHARGE EXORBITANT RATES FROM
CHARGE EXORBITANT RATES FROM PEOPLE WHO JUST NEED SOME MONEY
PEOPLE WHO JUST NEED SOME MONEY TO MAKE IT TO THEIR NEXT PAY
TO MAKE IT TO THEIR NEXT PAY DAY.
DAY. THOSE KINDS OF LENDERS DO
THOSE KINDS OF LENDERS DO EVERYTHING THEY CAN TO HIDE THE
EVERYTHING THEY CAN TO HIDE THE ANNUAL PERCENTAGE RATE OF THEIR
ANNUAL PERCENTAGE RATE OF THEIR LOANS USUALLY REFERRED TO AS THE
LOANS USUALLY REFERRED TO AS THE APR, THE AMOUNT OF MONEY IT
APR, THE AMOUNT OF MONEY IT COSTS YOU PER YEAR TO BORROW.
COSTS YOU PER YEAR TO BORROW. THAT’S THE APR AND THAT’S WHAT
THAT’S THE APR AND THAT’S WHAT MANY LENDERS DO NOT WANT YOU TO
MANY LENDERS DO NOT WANT YOU TO KNOW.
KNOW. IT WAS PROFESSOR ELIZABETH
IT WAS PROFESSOR ELIZABETH WARREN’S DESIGN THAT WAS
WARREN’S DESIGN THAT WAS INCLUDED IN THE 2010 PACKAGE OF
INCLUDED IN THE 2010 PACKAGE OF LEGISLATION PASSED BY CONGRESS
LEGISLATION PASSED BY CONGRESS WITH BIPARTISAN SUPPORT AND
WITH BIPARTISAN SUPPORT AND SIGNED BY PRESIDENT OBAMA, THE
SIGNED BY PRESIDENT OBAMA, THE DODD-FRANK WALL STREET REFORM
DODD-FRANK WALL STREET REFORM AND PROTECTION ACT IT WAS
AND PROTECTION ACT IT WAS CALLED.
CALLED. THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION HATES
THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION HATES CONSUMER PROTECTION.
CONSUMER PROTECTION. DONALD TRUMP, AFTER ALL, SPENT A
DONALD TRUMP, AFTER ALL, SPENT A LIFETIME EXPLOITING CONSUMERS IN
LIFETIME EXPLOITING CONSUMERS IN VARIOUS WAYS INCLUDING
VARIOUS WAYS INCLUDING DEFRAUDING CONSUMERS WHO MADE
DEFRAUDING CONSUMERS WHO MADE THE MISTAKE THINKING TRUMP
THE MISTAKE THINKING TRUMP UNIVERSITY COULD CHANGE THEIR
UNIVERSITY COULD CHANGE THEIR LIVES.
LIVES. DONALD TRUMP WAS FORCED TO PAY
DONALD TRUMP WAS FORCED TO PAY STUDENTS $25 MILLION AFTER THEY
STUDENTS $25 MILLION AFTER THEY SUED HIM FOR FRAUD.
SUED HIM FOR FRAUD. CREATORS OF FRAUDULENT
CREATORS OF FRAUDULENT BUSINESSES HATE THE PROTECTION
BUSINESSES HATE THE PROTECTION BUREAU.
BUREAU. THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION’S
THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION’S DIRECTOR OF THE CFPB HAS NO
DIRECTOR OF THE CFPB HAS NO EXPERIENCE IN CONSUMER
EXPERIENCE IN CONSUMER PROTECTION AND NO EXPERIENCE IN
PROTECTION AND NO EXPERIENCE IN OVERSIGHT OF THE FINANCIAL
OVERSIGHT OF THE FINANCIAL SERVICES INDUSTRY AND HAS
SERVICES INDUSTRY AND HAS DRAMATICALLY REDUCED THE NUMBER
DRAMATICALLY REDUCED THE NUMBER OF CONSUMER COMPLAINTS THAT THE
OF CONSUMER COMPLAINTS THAT THE CFPB INVESTIGATES.
CFPB INVESTIGATES. SHE RAN INTO MORE THAN SHE CAN
SHE RAN INTO MORE THAN SHE CAN HANDLE LAST WEEK WHEN IT WAS
HANDLE LAST WEEK WHEN IT WAS FRESHMAN CONGRESSWOMAN KATIE
FRESHMAN CONGRESSWOMAN KATIE PORTER’S TURN IN A HOUSE
PORTER’S TURN IN A HOUSE FINANCIAL SERVICES COMMITTEE
FINANCIAL SERVICES COMMITTEE HEARING.
HEARING. >> HELLO, DIRECTOR.
>> HELLO, DIRECTOR. COULD YOU PLEASE EXPLAIN TO THIS
COULD YOU PLEASE EXPLAIN TO THIS COMMITTEE THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
COMMITTEE THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN AN INTEREST RATE AND APR?
AN INTEREST RATE AND APR? >> APR IS EXTRAPOLATION IF IT
>> APR IS EXTRAPOLATION IF IT WERE A ONE YEAR TERM.
WERE A ONE YEAR TERM. THAT’S THE CALCULATION LAID OUT.
THAT’S THE CALCULATION LAID OUT. >> SO IF I TAKE THE STATED
>> SO IF I TAKE THE STATED INTEREST RATE AND DO THE MATH TO
INTEREST RATE AND DO THE MATH TO DEAL WITH THE FACT THAT IT IS
DEAL WITH THE FACT THAT IT IS ANNUALIZED, THE APR, IT WOULD BE
ANNUALIZED, THE APR, IT WOULD BE CORRECT?
CORRECT? >> YES.
>> YES. >> OKAY.
>> OKAY. THE ANNUAL PERCENTAGE RATE --
THE ANNUAL PERCENTAGE RATE -- AND I WILL BE HAPPY TO SEND YOU
AND I WILL BE HAPPY TO SEND YOU A COPY OF THE TEXTBOOK THAT I
A COPY OF THE TEXTBOOK THAT I WROTE, EXPLAINS THAT THE APR IS
WROTE, EXPLAINS THAT THE APR IS DERIVED FROM THE FINANCE CHARGE,
DERIVED FROM THE FINANCE CHARGE, THE AMOUNT FINANCED AND THE
THE AMOUNT FINANCED AND THE PAYMENT SCHEDULE.
PAYMENT SCHEDULE. IT’S A MATHEMATICAL
IT’S A MATHEMATICAL TRANSFORMATION OF THOSE NUMBERS
TRANSFORMATION OF THOSE NUMBERS INTO THE COST OF CREDIT
INTO THE COST OF CREDIT EXPRESSED ON A YEARLY RATE.
EXPRESSED ON A YEARLY RATE. >> A SIMPLIFICATION I UNDERSTAND
>> A SIMPLIFICATION I UNDERSTAND THAT YOU KNOW WELL.
THAT YOU KNOW WELL. >> MY CONCERN IS WHETHER YOU
>> MY CONCERN IS WHETHER YOU KNOW WELL BECAUSE YOU ARE THE
KNOW WELL BECAUSE YOU ARE THE ONE RESPONSIBLE FOR MAKING SURE
ONE RESPONSIBLE FOR MAKING SURE THAT AMERICAN CONSUMERS KNOW
THAT AMERICAN CONSUMERS KNOW WELL WHEN THEY TAKE ON LOANS.
WELL WHEN THEY TAKE ON LOANS. LET’S DO AN EXAMPLE.
LET’S DO AN EXAMPLE. I’M A SINGLE MOM.
I’M A SINGLE MOM. I’M BY THE SIDE OF THE ROAD.
I’M BY THE SIDE OF THE ROAD. MY CAR IS BROKEN DOWN.
MY CAR IS BROKEN DOWN. I NEED MONEY RIGHT NOW.
I NEED MONEY RIGHT NOW. I PICK UP MY CELL PHONE.
I PICK UP MY CELL PHONE. I GO TO SPEEDY CASH, AN ONLINE
I GO TO SPEEDY CASH, AN ONLINE LENDER.
LENDER. I’M IN CALIFORNIA.
I’M IN CALIFORNIA. I HAVE TO GET TO WORK.
I HAVE TO GET TO WORK. I HAVE TO HAVE THE CASH TO FIX
I HAVE TO HAVE THE CASH TO FIX MY CAR TO GET TO WORK.
MY CAR TO GET TO WORK. I CAN BARELY READ THE LITTLE
I CAN BARELY READ THE LITTLE DISCLOSURE ON MY PHONE.
DISCLOSURE ON MY PHONE. THE COST AT SPEEDY CASH IS --
THE COST AT SPEEDY CASH IS -- YOU MAY WANT TO WRITE THIS DOWN,
YOU MAY WANT TO WRITE THIS DOWN, $10 PER $100 BORROWED.
$10 PER $100 BORROWED. I NEED $200 TO FIX MY CAR.
I NEED $200 TO FIX MY CAR. THE ORIGINATION FEE IS $20.
THE ORIGINATION FEE IS $20. THE TERM OF THE LOAN IS TWO
THE TERM OF THE LOAN IS TWO WEEKS TYPICAL FOR WHEN I GET
WEEKS TYPICAL FOR WHEN I GET PAID.
PAID. WHAT IS THE APR?
WHAT IS THE APR? >> I UNDERSTAND WHERE YOU ARE
>> I UNDERSTAND WHERE YOU ARE GETTING.
GETTING. AT THE END OF THE DAY THE ISSUE
AT THE END OF THE DAY THE ISSUE IS CERTAINLY WHEN YOU ACTUALLY
IS CERTAINLY WHEN YOU ACTUALLY ARE ABLE TO REPAY THAT LOAN AND
ARE ABLE TO REPAY THAT LOAN AND WHETHER OR NOT YOU TAKE AN
WHETHER OR NOT YOU TAKE AN ADDITIONAL LOAN GOING THROUGH
ADDITIONAL LOAN GOING THROUGH THIS.
THIS. >> I’M ASKING YOU WHAT THE APR
>> I’M ASKING YOU WHAT THE APR IS.
IS. >> KATIE PORTER HAD TO RECLAIM
>> KATIE PORTER HAD TO RECLAIM HER TIME REPEATEDLY BECAUSE SHE
HER TIME REPEATEDLY BECAUSE SHE COULD NOT GET AN ANSWER ON THE
COULD NOT GET AN ANSWER ON THE SIMPLE QUESTION ON WHAT IS THE
SIMPLE QUESTION ON WHAT IS THE ANNUAL PERCENTAGE RATE OF THE
ANNUAL PERCENTAGE RATE OF THE PREDATORY PAY DAY LOAN
PREDATORY PAY DAY LOAN DESCRIBED.
DESCRIBED. SO CONGRESSWOMAN PORTER ENDED
SO CONGRESSWOMAN PORTER ENDED THE LINE OF QUESTIONING THIS
THE LINE OF QUESTIONING THIS WAY.
WAY. >> I’M RECLAIMING MY TIME.
>> I’M RECLAIMING MY TIME. RECLAIMING MY TIME.
RECLAIMING MY TIME. I TAKE THAT AS TO A NO THAT YOU
I TAKE THAT AS TO A NO THAT YOU CANNOT DO THE CALCULATION.
CANNOT DO THE CALCULATION. I AM PARTICULARLY CONCERNED
I AM PARTICULARLY CONCERNED ABOUT THIS GIVEN THAT YOU COULD
ABOUT THIS GIVEN THAT YOU COULD NOT EVEN CORRECTLY DEFINE THE
NOT EVEN CORRECTLY DEFINE THE APR.
APR. >> CONGRESSWOMAN PORTER THEN
>> CONGRESSWOMAN PORTER THEN TWEETED THE ANSWER TO HER OWN
TWEETED THE ANSWER TO HER OWN QUESTION TO STUDENTS AT HOME.
QUESTION TO STUDENTS AT HOME. THE ANSWER IS THE $20
THE ANSWER IS THE $20 ORIGINATION FEE IS INCLUDED IN
ORIGINATION FEE IS INCLUDED IN THE DEFINITION OF FINANCE CHARGE
THE DEFINITION OF FINANCE CHARGE SO THE TROPICAL STORM OF $20
SO THE TROPICAL STORM OF $20 PLUS THE FEE OF $20 MAKES THE
PLUS THE FEE OF $20 MAKES THE $40 COST TO BORROW $200 FOR 14
$40 COST TO BORROW $200 FOR 14 DAYS THE ANSWER, 520% WOULD BE
DAYS THE ANSWER, 520% WOULD BE THE APR.
THE APR. TRUTH IN LENDING LAW REQUIRES
TRUTH IN LENDING LAW REQUIRES APR TO INCLUDE FEES WHICH CFPD
APR TO INCLUDE FEES WHICH CFPD DIRECTOR DID NOT KNOW.
DIRECTOR DID NOT KNOW. LIKE ELIZABETH WARREN BEFORE
LIKE ELIZABETH WARREN BEFORE HER, KATIE PORTER WAS A LAW
HER, KATIE PORTER WAS A LAW SCHOOL PROFESSOR BEFORE SHE
SCHOOL PROFESSOR BEFORE SHE BECAME A MEMBER OF CONGRESS AND